Risk Reassessment Cheat Sheet
The Risk Reassessment must be completed with all Contacts who scale at High or Imminent Risk at any point in the conversation. It may also be used with Medium Risk cases if needed, and any time there is ambiguity on Risk Level and/or an immediate safety concern. 

The purpose of the Risk Reassessment is to re-evaluate a Contact after sufficient rapport has been built and there has been a sincere attempt at de-escalation, including Exploring Alternatives and Safety Planning, to clarify if there has been a Risk Level reduction. This information may be crucial in determining any needed plans of action, and will be information that a Supervisor will likely ask about. 
Completing the Risk Reassessment
Begin the Risk Reassessment by revisiting the information disclosed during the original Assessment. 

●	“Earlier you mentioned your plan to hang yourself tonight using a rope in your basement. How are you feeling about that plan now?”
●	“We’ve been talking for a while, and I want to circle back to when you mentioned earlier that you were planning to kill yourself by taking a bottle of your anti-depressants in the woods behind your house on your mother’s birthday next Thursday. How are you feeling about that plan now?”

Try to clarify any ambiguous answers to the Risk Reassessment such as “I don’t know” or “I’m feeling better” or “I’m fine” to get as concrete of an end-of-conversation Risk Level as possible. 

●	When you say “[I'm fine/I feel better/insert Contact’s language]”, do you mean that you are no longer planning on following through with the plan we discussed earlier?”
○	If the Contact continues to remain ambiguous, prompt with more specific plan information from the original Risk Assessment: Do you mean that you are no longer planning on following through with the plan we discussed earlier within the next two days?"
Risk Level Reduction 
A Contact is considered de-escalated if they specifically endorse delaying their planned attempt, typically by stating an alternative plan (i.e. a Safety Plan). 

●	If the Contact states that they still plan to attempt but outside 48 hours from now, this would be considered de-escalation from Imminent Risk to High Risk. If they still have accessible means and a plan, but no longer have an identified timeframe, this would be considered de-escalation to Medium Risk. 
●	Sometimes Contacts may endorse a delay in their timeframe that could still qualify as Imminent Risk. Despite some de-escalation from their original plan, Counselors should continue to adhere to our Imminent Risk protocols. 
