Safety Planning
●	Risk Level Re-Assessment 

Fill this section out to reflect your conversation with the youth:
●	If you did not complete a Risk Reassessment question (or did not need to), enter “Did not ask.”
●	If you completed a Risk Reassessment question, enter the contact’s updated risk level resulting from the new information.
●	On Call Consult
●	Choose the appropriate drop-down menu to indicate whether the On-Call Consult was contacted during the conversation.
Additional Information
●	Conversion Therapy Mentioned
●	Choose “yes” or “no” to indicate whether the contact mentioned conversion therapy.

●	Brief Narrative Summary
The Brief Narrative Summary should detail a general arc of your conversation with the contact and include a summary of the presenting issue, the emotional state of the contact, and any safety concern or support systems available to them.  A general outline of a brief narrative summary includes:

●	Written in short paragraphs or list form.
●	What brought the contact to Trevor today? (1 sentence)
●	Details from the Risk Assessment - means, plan, and timeframe. (1 sentence)
●	Summary of discussion during gathering information, including an explanation of any safety risks. (1 to 3 sentences) 
●	Summary of coping strategies and safety plan discussed.
●	Information about an after-conversation plan, if created.

Reminder: Use they/them pronouns for all contacts unless they specifically tell you their pronouns. You may also use the contact’s name, or just “the contact” to refer to them in the third person.
  
General Tips
●	Case records should be written to reflect the contact’s experiences as closely as possible. Refrain from speculation and personal interpretations of what they have shared with you. 
●	Include any direct quotes from contact in “quotation marks.” 
●	You may move your cursor over the "i" symbol to see tips about how to fill out that field. 
●	Fill out and save frequently after the Risk Assessment, so that your Supervisor can see the most up to date information on risk level. Try to fill out as much of the case record as you can during the conversation. 
●	Save often! But never use “Save and Close!”

Conversation Time Limits
In order to support a significant number of Contacts who experience a wide range of crises, conversation time limits are one way Crisis Intervention ensures Counselors can connect with each Contact in a timely manner. Keeping within these limits helps balance providing quality care with supporting as many Contacts as possible; part of that quality of care is the understanding that, in our capacity as short term crisis Counselors, giving more time does not necessarily yield better outcomes. Staying within the set time frames establishes healthy boundaries, allows us to provide consistent experiences for Contacts, and affirms our role as a short-term crisis service rather than long-term therapeutic provider.

Conversation time limits are determined based on the age of the Contact and their Risk Level. Contacts under the age of 25 are defined as “in-demographic” and Contacts who are 25 years old or older are defined as “out-of-demographic”. Demographics are specifically tied to age, an individual's sexual orientation and/or gender identity (SOGI) do not indicate in- or out-of-demo. 
●	REMINDER: Language and references to being "in-demo" or "out-of-demo" is for internal use only. Counselors should treat all Contacts the same during conversations, regardless of age. 