Some Contacts come to our service looking for advice on how to handle a problem or situation. Because a short-term crisis Counselor could never fully understand the complexities of their issue, refrain from offering advice on what Contacts should do next. Instead, use open-ended questions to explore the following: 

●	Ways the Contact has coped in the past
●	What the Contact has considered doing to cope
●	Activities that serve as distractions 
○	What do they enjoy doing?
●	How they feel about their options
○	Do they want to brainstorm alternatives together?
●	What gives the Contact purpose
○	What are things in their life that make you feel whole?
Harm Reduction 
Our Contacts experience a wide range of circumstances that involve varying degrees of risk or potential harm, which might stem from the Contact’s present environment, coping skills, or plans made for the future. As Counselors, our role is to center the Contact’s perspective and agency, trusting that they know their situation best and are best positioned to make decisions for their life. 

Harm Reduction refers to mitigating or reducing the potential harm associated with a variety of behaviors, including but not limited to self-injury, drug and alcohol use,  and sexual activities. This framework explores and presents options for taking situations and behaviors that involve risk of harm and making them safer, in small or large degrees, in nonjudgmental, non-prescriptive ways. 
Principles for Harm Reduction
1.	Follow the Contact’s lead 
2.	Validate the feeling behind the potentially harmful behavior instead of the behavior itself
a.	Explore the reason for the behavior and the feeling achieved by it 
3.	Validate the Contact for working to find coping strategies that work for them 
4.	Preserve and respect the Contact’s autonomy
Tools for Harm Reduction
●	Frequency of harm 
○	What would it feel like to self-injure less often?
○	What would it feel like to use [insert substance] less frequently?
●	Cleanliness + infection prevention
○	How does the Contact ensure cleanliness in their substance use?
○	How does the Contact clean and care for self-injury on the body?
●	Questions from Contacts
○	It is important that Counselors do not provide medical advice to a Contact, including but not limited to information on cleaning, pressure, elevation, lethality, or other wound care. Refer to the Medical Questions section for further information and advice. 
●	Emotional, Physical and Social Cues
○	Support the Contact in identifying warning cues of a behavior
○	Explore the possibility of removing or changing those warning cues.

Example Language:
●	“It sounds like [coping mechanism] is something you really value. What would it be like to [harm reduction technique (e.g., clean wounds, make sure you have a designated driver)] next time you [coping mechanism].”
●	“It sounds like thinking of ways to reduce your [insert behavior] is too much right now. I’d love to hear more about what’s been going on for you and how the [insert behavior] makes you feel.”
Restoring Agency
●	It sounds like you’re feeling powerless in this situation, what are some things that make you feel powerful? 
○	When do you feel most powerful?
○	Where do you feel more powerful?
●	I can understand it’s really difficult to cope with things out of our control. What are some actions that help you regain a sense of control? 
○	When do you feel most in control?
○	Where do you feel most in control?
●	If [worst  case scenario] happens, what are some other steps you can take that don’t involve [suicide plan]? 
○	If [worst case scenario] happens, what would it be like to try [Safety Plan] first? 
○	If [Safety Plan] doesn’t feel like enough, how would it feel to reach back out to us? 
Resources
Counselors are not expected to be an expert on resources. However, Counselors are encouraged to familiarize themselves with the guidance given in this Handbook, Resources for Contacts, and Navigating Sharing Resources with Contacts Guidance when selecting resources for a Contact. If there are difficulties finding resources, ask a Supervisor for assistance. 

TrevorSpace
TrevorSpace.org (Trevor link) is the world’s largest safe space social networking site for LGBTQ+ youth ages 13 through 24 and their friends and allies. Available internationally, it may be a potential resource for a Contact who is interested in obtaining peer support from others. 
●	“It sounds like you want to meet other people who share your identity, I have a resource that might be of interest. Are you open to hearing about that?”
●	“Sometimes meeting other people with similar experiences can be helpful, I know a resource that might help with that. Would you be interested in that?”
○	If so: “Okay, it’s called TrevorSpace and it is run by a team here at The Trevor Project. It is the world’s largest safe space social networking site for LGBTQ+ youth ages 13 through 24 and their friends and allies. You can check it out at www.TrevorSpace.org.”
Trevor Resource Center
The Trevor Project website features a Resource Center (Trevor link) organized by topic with many frequently asked questions and links to additional information. This can be a helpful resource while on shift, as well as for the Contacts being counseling.
●	“Would you be interested in a place to find resources and information for LGBTQ+ youth?”
○	If so: “The Trevor Project website has a feature called the Resource Center. It is organized by topic and includes many frequently asked questions and links to additional information. You can check it out at https://www.thetrevorproject.org/resources/."
