Restoring Agency
●	It sounds like you’re feeling powerless in this situation, what are some things that make you feel powerful? 
○	When do you feel most powerful?
○	Where do you feel more powerful?
●	I can understand it’s really difficult to cope with things out of our control. What are some actions that help you regain a sense of control? 
○	When do you feel most in control?
○	Where do you feel most in control?
●	If [worst  case scenario] happens, what are some other steps you can take that don’t involve [suicide plan]? 
○	If [worst case scenario] happens, what would it be like to try [Safety Plan] first? 
○	If [Safety Plan] doesn’t feel like enough, how would it feel to reach back out to us? 
Resources
Counselors are not expected to be an expert on resources. However, Counselors are encouraged to familiarize themselves with the guidance given in this Handbook, Resources for Contacts, and Navigating Sharing Resources with Contacts Guidance when selecting resources for a Contact. If there are difficulties finding resources, ask a Supervisor for assistance. 

TrevorSpace
TrevorSpace.org (Trevor link) is the world’s largest safe space social networking site for LGBTQ+ youth ages 13 through 24 and their friends and allies. Available internationally, it may be a potential resource for a Contact who is interested in obtaining peer support from others. 
●	“It sounds like you want to meet other people who share your identity, I have a resource that might be of interest. Are you open to hearing about that?”
●	“Sometimes meeting other people with similar experiences can be helpful, I know a resource that might help with that. Would you be interested in that?”
○	If so: “Okay, it’s called TrevorSpace and it is run by a team here at The Trevor Project. It is the world’s largest safe space social networking site for LGBTQ+ youth ages 13 through 24 and their friends and allies. You can check it out at www.TrevorSpace.org.”
Trevor Resource Center
The Trevor Project website features a Resource Center (Trevor link) organized by topic with many frequently asked questions and links to additional information. This can be a helpful resource while on shift, as well as for the Contacts being counseling.
●	“Would you be interested in a place to find resources and information for LGBTQ+ youth?”
○	If so: “The Trevor Project website has a feature called the Resource Center. It is organized by topic and includes many frequently asked questions and links to additional information. You can check it out at https://www.thetrevorproject.org/resources/."
