Developing a Stanley-Brown Safety Plan
The Stanley-Brown Safety Plan approach is a research-based, clinically-sound, safety planning guideline incorporated into many other crisis intervention service provider's programs, including the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. The purpose of the Stanley-Brown Safety Plan is to provide people who have experienced a mental health crisis with a specific set of coping strategies and resources to use in order to decrease the risk of suicidal and/or NSSI behaviors.

Counselors should follow the Stanley-Brown Safety Plan Template fully and in the order it is written (this link can be shared with Contacts a resource too!) when developing a safety plan with a Contact. The Stanley-Brown Safety Plan uses 6 steps to develop a comprehensive safety plan with a Contact: (1) warning signs; (2) Internal coping strategies; (3) people and social settings that provide distraction; (4) people whom I can ask for help during a crisis; (5) professionals or agencies I can contact during a crisis; (6) making the environment safer.
STEP 1: WARNING SIGNS
Recognize warning signs of an impending suicidal crisis.

It’s helpful, not just for the Counselors, but for the Contact to be able to explicitly identify what things lead to their current state of suicidality. Being able to reflect the contributing events and thoughts that lead to the point of seriously considering, or even attempting, suicide is the first component of Stanley-Brown safety planning. This can help Contacts be aware of enacting the safety plan the next time they may find themselves in a similar situation/feelings.
STEP 2: INTERNAL COPING STRATEGIES
Employ internal coping strategies.

The reason Stanley and Brown characterize coping strategies as “internal” is because all other active parts of safety planning are external to the person. That does not mean that all coping strategies must be internal behaviors and thoughts. All coping strategies that can be done “without reaching out to other people” are considered internal. Therefore, kickboxing is still an internal coping strategy, even though in the broader scientific literature kickboxing would be an externalizing behavior. 

Framing distractions with positive emotions is a really high bar since it’s entirely common to feel like nothing makes them feel even a tiny bit better, especially for folks navigating chronic suicidality . The goal of coping skills is not symptom improvement, but a distraction to get through the moment. Even something completely basic like eating, sleeping, and/or drinking water can all be distractions.

STEP 3: PEOPLE & SOCIAL SETTINGS THAT PROVIDE DISTRACTION
Utilize social contacts as a means of distraction from suicidal thoughts.

Distractions can serve as a safety plan component without the Contact disclosing the presenting issue to the people involved. For example, a person may ask to hang out with a friend just to be around other people and never bring up suicidality, even if that was something that they are struggling with. Again, suicide risk is temporary: even people who are suffering from chronic suicidality are not usually imminent risk 24/7. The goal of safety planning is how to get through that moment through a variety of ways.

Most importantly, the part to note about this step of the safety plan is “social settings”. A lot of times our Counselors currently try to find anyone under the sun that can maybe tangentially support the Contact. However, asking for help is a high hurdle for anyone, and having to re-explain your situation and your triggers over and over again can be traumatic on its own. Social setting is as simple as “going to a local coffee shop” or “going to church”. There is no expectation in either of those examples for someone to start having deeply intimate conversations about death and dying. But sometimes it’s just about not being alone when you feel that way.
STEP 4: PEOPLE TO ASK FOR HELP DURING A CRISIS
Contact family members, friends, or other individuals who may help to resolve the crisis.

The helpful part of Stanley-Brown safety planning is the stepwise fashion in which it takes a person through a way to stay safe. Thinking logically through each step can be difficult for anyone, particularly for someone who is in a life-threatening crisis. By exploring a broader category of support in terms of people who can serve as a distraction, it can better remind the Contact of the interconnectedness of themselves to society and their existing social network. Oftentimes when we dive right into asking about support, it comes as too left field for someone who was already ready to end their life in that moment despite all other factors. By exploring Components 1-3 first, Component 4 can be better transitioned into more organically and possibly easier for Contacts to think through (though it’s never a guarantee).

A critical part of safety planning is connecting people to their own systems of support in addition to their own coping skills. While it is always ideal for someone to not be physically alone during suicidal crisis, particularly after someone has recently attempted or been discharged from care after a suicide attempt, we do not live in a world of ideals. Stanley-Brown safety planning does NOT require the person that a person can reach out to in a moment of crisis to be physically and immediately available, though that is a helpful protective factor explored in our revised Safety Assessment.
STEP 5: PROFESSIONALS & AGENCIES TO CONTACT DURING A CRISIS
Contact mental health clinicians or agencies for professional support.

Not everyone has access to professional services. However, the expectations here are fairly broad. The distinction between Component 4 and Component 5 is that Component 4 tends to draw from a person’s existing social network, like friends and family, whereas Component 5 tends to extend beyond a person’s immediate social circles. The obvious professionals most Counselors think of are therapists, but the inclusion of agencies opens up other avenues such as hotlines, mobile crisis, and crisis centers.

Important to note here that if the Contact thinks we are helpful at a time of life-threatening crisis, Trevor is a totally acceptable option as this part of the safety plan and can naturally segue into offering callbacks. There is bit of a conflation with our Counselors that try to set boundaries that we are not here for long-term support, but some people’s suicidal crises are lifelong. We shouldn’t discourage or shame anyone to reach out, even if we may not want to encourage in every situation such as someone who is a familiar contact.
STEP 6: MAKING THE ENVIRONMENT SAFER
Make the environment safer by reducing the potential use of lethal means. 

This is likely the part of safety planning that Counselors are especially familiar with, separation of the means techniques utilized during the Safety Assessment is one example of making the environment safer. If separation of the means is all Counselors can do, that is OK. But ideally, Counselors want to work with the Contact to make the environment safer even after the conversation ends: not simply during it.

If a Contact is unwilling or feeling unable to separate themselves from the means, the next question in trying to explore a different alternative should be a different type of question. For example, if they don’t want to put away the knife in a different room, we can ask if they feel comfortable putting it down right in front of them. ANY movement towards something that is safer is progress from a harm-reduction standpoint.