Safety Planning Overview
Safety plans can look very different from conversation to conversation, and Counselors should always let the Contact take the lead in deciding what they’re willing to try. However, the guidelines in this article can be helpful when working to establish clear plans for Contacts to engage in to stay safe after they have ended their conversation with a Counselor. 

●	Low & Medium Risk: For Low and Medium Risk Contacts, safety planning generally comes up near the end of Exploring Alternatives after a Contact has de-escalated. There may be cases with Low and Medium Risk Contacts where they are not open to developing a safety plan, that is okay! Meet the Contact where they are, follow their lead, and exploring the feelings that safety planning brings up for them if they are open to it.
●	Imminent Risk: For Imminent Risk Contacts, Counselors should immediately flag a Supervisor following the Risk Assessment to alert them of the Contact's risk level. Then Counselors should immediately shift the focus of the conversation towards active safety planning and gathering additional information about the situation at hand. Developing a solid safety plan is the least invasive method if intervention for an imminent safety risk and can prevent an active intervention from being initiated. Counselors should stay in consistent communication with the Supervisor and follow the Active Intervention Policy, if necessary.
What is a Safety Plan?
A safety plan is a detailed, specific, organized, actionable, and collaboratively developed plan that a Contact can utilize to stay safe for a specific period of time, or in response to unique pressures or situations that may arise. Safety planning can be used in any situation where a Contact is in danger of harming themself, harming others, or being harmed by someone else. Safety plans can contain one or more steps to help someone stay safe, either on their own or until help arrives.

Safety planning may include working with a Contact to:

●	Identify triggers or warning signs of distress;
●	Identify coping skills;
●	Identify support systems;
●	Consider what social supports or distractions are available;
●	Separate from means; and/or
●	Explore available professional resources.

For example, Counselors may want to encourage a Contact to remove means for suicide or self-harm; ask if a Contact wants to open up to trusted adults about their primary issue(s); or support a Contact in writing down coping strategies and self-care activities that they can utilize when feeling unsafe or in need of emotional support. Safety plans require active engagement and participation from the Contact.
Why Safety Plan?
Safety planning helps ensure that a Contact can stay safe from imminent harm when experiencing thoughts of suicide, or when responding to specific pressures or situations. By leaning into a Contact’s knowledge and experience, safety plans prioritize the Contact’s agency in determining what will be most helpful for them. Ideally, a safety plan can mitigate future crises by allowing a Contact to explore deescalation strategies before entering into a state of emergency, and reduces the likelihood that third parties will be involved without a Contact’s consent.  

While callbacks can be an important part of safety planning, they are not sufficient as a safety plan alone. By setting up solid safety plans with our Contacts in addition to providing callbacks, we can provide our Contacts with additional tools and resources to explore when in crisis. Furthermore, there are many situations in which safety planning may be useful to a Contact who is not at imminent risk of suicide. For example, safety planning around practices of self-harm, substance use, or bullying could help a Contact stay safe in many types of situations where they may be at risk of harm. See the Outgoing Call Protocols article for more detailed information. 
Key Principles for Counselors
When working with a Contact to explore or develop a Safety Plan, the following principles are important to keep in mind:

●	Work together to develop the plan.
●	Make sure the plan is tailored for each individual.
●	Orient the plan toward a harm reduction approach.
●	Utilize existing social and professional supports.
●	Identify sources of 24-hour support (e.g., The Trevor Project, 988 Lifeline, etc.)
●	Encourage the Contact to document the plan by writing or typing it out and saving it for future reference.
●	A Contact should affirm their willingness and ability to engage in the safety plan for it to be considered a solid plan.  A safety plan should include steps that can be taken within the immediate time frame of risk.
Developing a Stanley-Brown Safety Plan
The Stanley-Brown Safety Plan approach is a research-based, clinically-sound, safety planning guideline incorporated into many other crisis intervention service provider's programs, including the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. The purpose of the Stanley-Brown Safety Plan is to provide people who have experienced a mental health crisis with a specific set of coping strategies and resources to use in order to decrease the risk of suicidal and/or NSSI behaviors.

Counselors should follow the Stanley-Brown Safety Plan Template fully and in the order it is written (this link can be shared with Contacts a resource too!) when developing a safety plan with a Contact. The Stanley-Brown Safety Plan uses 6 steps to develop a comprehensive safety plan with a Contact: (1) warning signs; (2) Internal coping strategies; (3) people and social settings that provide distraction; (4) people whom I can ask for help during a crisis; (5) professionals or agencies I can contact during a crisis; (6) making the environment safer.
STEP 1: WARNING SIGNS
Recognize warning signs of an impending suicidal crisis.

It’s helpful, not just for the Counselors, but for the Contact to be able to explicitly identify what things lead to their current state of suicidality. Being able to reflect the contributing events and thoughts that lead to the point of seriously considering, or even attempting, suicide is the first component of Stanley-Brown safety planning. This can help Contacts be aware of enacting the safety plan the next time they may find themselves in a similar situation/feelings.
STEP 2: INTERNAL COPING STRATEGIES
Employ internal coping strategies.

The reason Stanley and Brown characterize coping strategies as “internal” is because all other active parts of safety planning are external to the person. That does not mean that all coping strategies must be internal behaviors and thoughts. All coping strategies that can be done “without reaching out to other people” are considered internal. Therefore, kickboxing is still an internal coping strategy, even though in the broader scientific literature kickboxing would be an externalizing behavior. 

Framing distractions with positive emotions is a really high bar since it’s entirely common to feel like nothing makes them feel even a tiny bit better, especially for folks navigating chronic suicidality . The goal of coping skills is not symptom improvement, but a distraction to get through the moment. Even something completely basic like eating, sleeping, and/or drinking water can all be distractions.

STEP 3: PEOPLE & SOCIAL SETTINGS THAT PROVIDE DISTRACTION
Utilize social contacts as a means of distraction from suicidal thoughts.

Distractions can serve as a safety plan component without the Contact disclosing the presenting issue to the people involved. For example, a person may ask to hang out with a friend just to be around other people and never bring up suicidality, even if that was something that they are struggling with. Again, suicide risk is temporary: even people who are suffering from chronic suicidality are not usually imminent risk 24/7. The goal of safety planning is how to get through that moment through a variety of ways.

Most importantly, the part to note about this step of the safety plan is “social settings”. A lot of times our Counselors currently try to find anyone under the sun that can maybe tangentially support the Contact. However, asking for help is a high hurdle for anyone, and having to re-explain your situation and your triggers over and over again can be traumatic on its own. Social setting is as simple as “going to a local coffee shop” or “going to church”. There is no expectation in either of those examples for someone to start having deeply intimate conversations about death and dying. But sometimes it’s just about not being alone when you feel that way.
STEP 4: PEOPLE TO ASK FOR HELP DURING A CRISIS
Contact family members, friends, or other individuals who may help to resolve the crisis.

The helpful part of Stanley-Brown safety planning is the stepwise fashion in which it takes a person through a way to stay safe. Thinking logically through each step can be difficult for anyone, particularly for someone who is in a life-threatening crisis. By exploring a broader category of support in terms of people who can serve as a distraction, it can better remind the Contact of the interconnectedness of themselves to society and their existing social network. Oftentimes when we dive right into asking about support, it comes as too left field for someone who was already ready to end their life in that moment despite all other factors. By exploring Components 1-3 first, Component 4 can be better transitioned into more organically and possibly easier for Contacts to think through (though it’s never a guarantee).

A critical part of safety planning is connecting people to their own systems of support in addition to their own coping skills. While it is always ideal for someone to not be physically alone during suicidal crisis, particularly after someone has recently attempted or been discharged from care after a suicide attempt, we do not live in a world of ideals. Stanley-Brown safety planning does NOT require the person that a person can reach out to in a moment of crisis to be physically and immediately available, though that is a helpful protective factor explored in our revised Safety Assessment.
STEP 5: PROFESSIONALS & AGENCIES TO CONTACT DURING A CRISIS
Contact mental health clinicians or agencies for professional support.

Not everyone has access to professional services. However, the expectations here are fairly broad. The distinction between Component 4 and Component 5 is that Component 4 tends to draw from a person’s existing social network, like friends and family, whereas Component 5 tends to extend beyond a person’s immediate social circles. The obvious professionals most Counselors think of are therapists, but the inclusion of agencies opens up other avenues such as hotlines, mobile crisis, and crisis centers.

Important to note here that if the Contact thinks we are helpful at a time of life-threatening crisis, Trevor is a totally acceptable option as this part of the safety plan and can naturally segue into offering callbacks. There is bit of a conflation with our Counselors that try to set boundaries that we are not here for long-term support, but some people’s suicidal crises are lifelong. We shouldn’t discourage or shame anyone to reach out, even if we may not want to encourage in every situation such as someone who is a familiar contact.
STEP 6: MAKING THE ENVIRONMENT SAFER
Make the environment safer by reducing the potential use of lethal means. 

This is likely the part of safety planning that Counselors are especially familiar with, separation of the means techniques utilized during the Safety Assessment is one example of making the environment safer. If separation of the means is all Counselors can do, that is OK. But ideally, Counselors want to work with the Contact to make the environment safer even after the conversation ends: not simply during it.

If a Contact is unwilling or feeling unable to separate themselves from the means, the next question in trying to explore a different alternative should be a different type of question. For example, if they don’t want to put away the knife in a different room, we can ask if they feel comfortable putting it down right in front of them. ANY movement towards something that is safer is progress from a harm-reduction standpoint.
Identifying Resources for a Safety Plan
Depending on what type of resources a Contact has access to or identifies as being helpful, safety plans may include both internal and external resources.

Internal resources are things that a Contact has access to on their own, or within themselves. Examples of internal resources include coping strategies such as journaling, exploring/identifying personal triggers, engaging in physical activity, or utilizing breathing exercises.

External resources are people or places that a Contact has access to that they can turn to for support. Examples of external resources include things such as spending time with a pet; exploring/identifying social supports such as a supportive guardian, friend, family member, or teacher; exploring/identifying possible professional supports such as a school counselor, a therapist, or doctor; or discussing/identifying local or national resources, such as those available in Resources for Contacts. Resources for Contacts is a searchable repository of staff-reviewed resources in H2CS. Its resources cover a myriad of topics that might be useful in supporting our Contacts, such as:

●	Bullying
●	Child Abuse
●	Eating Disorders
●	School
●	Self-Injury
●	Sexual Assault and Rape
●	Substance Use and Addiction

For more information on finding and introducing resources in a conversation, see Navigating Resource Conversations for Counselors.
Contact Resistance to Safety Planning
Safety Plans are a collaborative effort and should involve the full participation and willingness of the Contact to engage with the plan. Not all Contacts will express an interest in working on a Safety Plan, in which case alternative strategies should be explored to address the safety of these Contacts while keeping their comfort and stated boundaries in mind. In these instances, it may be helpful to:

1.	Ask some additional questions to understand what it is about Safety Planning that is difficult or uncomfortable for the Contact to think about. Make sure to validate the feelings brought up in this conversation.
a.	“It can sometimes be tough to think about ways to stay safe. What feelings come up for you when I ask about your safety?”
b.	“Is there something you would like for me to know about what safety or feeling safe means to you?”
2.	Check in around ambivalent and ambiguous answers regarding safety (i.e., “it doesn’t matter”). Gather additional information and explore why this is (un)important for the Contact. If a Contact has trouble identifying coping strategies, external supports, etc., it may be helpful to gently explore possible strategies or supports.
a.	“I’m hearing that thinking about ways to stay safe doesn’t seem really important to you right now. Tell me more about why that feels unimportant?”
b.	“Is there something that you feel is more important for us to talk about right now?”
c.	“It sounds like it’s hard to think about what you can do to stay safe. I want you to know that I care about you and your safety, and I’m glad you reached out today. If you’re open to it, maybe we can work together to think of some things people can do to feel safe or connect to support, and see if there’s anything that you’d be interested in trying out with me or on your own after our conversation?”
3.	Refer to the current conversation and their reaching out as a step they have already taken to  address their safety and affirm that reaching out to Trevor can be part of a plan going forward.
a.	“In spite of everything going on right now, your reaching out and talking with me is a step you have taken to address your safety. That is not always easy, and I think it says a lot that you were willing to reach out to us today. We are always here for you when you need someone to talk to.”
b.	“While it sounds like safety is difficult to think about, I want to thank you for reaching out today. That is a huge step to take in addressing your safety. As you have been managing these thoughts for a while, I wonder if there are some other things you’ve done in the past to get through these difficult moments, and anything we might be able to try out today?”
4.	Ask more questions of the Contact to get a better sense of why they reached out, and what they hoped to gain from the conversation.
a.	“While our focus is on helping folks remain safe during a crisis, I hear that safety is not a topic you are interested in talking about right now.  Maybe you can tell me more about why you reached out tonight, so that I can better support you during this conversation?” 
5.	Temporarily move back into the Contact’s presenting issue(s), and/or to the Gathering Information section of the support model. Some Contacts may need more time before they feel comfortable exploring a Safety Plan. Be sure to circle back to Safety Planning, and check in to see if their Risk Level has changed during the conversation. 
a.	“It sounds like thinking of ways to stay safe feels like too much right now. I’d love to hear more about what’s been going on for you. What thoughts were going through your head as you reached out to us today?” 

Ultimately, some Contacts may not be willing or able to collaborate to address their safety. While Counselors should try to ensure that their safety is addressed, and that the conversation is in line with The Trevor Project’s protocols regarding de-escalation and bringing conversations to a close, Counselors should never force a Contact to engage in Safety Planning. If a Contact expresses little or no interest in addressing their safety, and they are at Imminent Risk, please reach out to a Supervisor for support, as they will coordinate with the OCC to determine if an Active Intervention is necessary.
Safety Planning Examples by Stanley-Brown Step
While safety planning always relies on the same general principles and guidelines and uses the same Stanley-Brown Safety Plan Template, each individual safety plan will look different and should be tailored to each individual Contact’s needs, abilities, accessible resources, and situation. Here are some examples of how to approach each step of a Stanley-Brown Safety Plan:
Step 1: Warning signs
It’s helpful, not just for the Counselors, but for the Contact to be able to explicitly identify what are things that lead to the current state of suicidality they are at. Being able to reflect the contributing events and thoughts that lead to the point of seriously considering, or even attempting, suicide is the first part of Stanley-Brown safety planning. This can help Contacts be aware of enacting the safety plan the next time they may find themselves in a similar situation/feelings.

Appropriate Examples
Many of our Gathering Information questions that talk through precipitating events and triggers are all helpful questions to ask about warning signs:

●	“What brought on these thoughts you’re having today?”
●	“So, tell me what happened. What lead up to the [suicide attempt]?”
●	“You mentioned earlier that [your breakup, etc.] caused your thoughts of suicide. Was there anything else going on?

Notice that neither of the above examples uses the phrase “warning signs”. It is a technical term and will not make any sense if that’s what the Counselor asked directly without actually leading up to that in the conversation, such as weaving the term in prior to the question.
Inappropriate Examples
Unhelpful ways to get at warning signs are ways that are framed as for our own benefit. While we need to understand enough to respond in a personalized manner, the person we are supporting to process and understand their own situation is the Contact first and foremost.
●	“I want to understand why you want to die.”

In addition, it is not helpful to approach any part of safety assessment nor planning in the framing of an obligation or a required step to follow. Not only can that come across as insincere, it undermines the point behind the assessment and the safety planning: the fact we care about the Contact, their well-being, and their needs in that particular moment.
●	“I have to ask about your warning signs because it says to do so on this checklist.”
●	“As a suicide and crisis line, I’m required to make a safety plan with you. What are the warning signs?”
Step 2: Internal Coping Strategies
The reason Stanley and Brown characterize coping strategies as “internal” is because all other active parts of safety planning are external to the person. That does not mean that all coping strategies must be internal behaviors and thoughts. All coping strategies that can be done “without reaching out to other people” are considered internal. Therefore, kickboxing is still an internal coping strategy, even though in the broader scientific literature kickboxing would be an externalizing behavior.
Appropriate Examples
●	“What have you done in the past to distract yourself when you feel [x]?”
●	“When you [watch TV], what about it that you find to be helpful?”
●	“If we wanted to write down a distraction you can try today, what would you write down?”
Inappropriate Examples
Framing distractions with positive emotions is a really high bar since it’s entirely common to feel like nothing makes them feel even a tiny bit better, especially for folks navigating chronic suicidality. The goal of coping skills is not symptom improvement, but a distraction to get through the moment. Even something completely basic like eating, sleeping, and/or drinking water can all be distractions.
●	“What makes you feel better when you are feeling like you want to kill yourself?”
●	“What are things that bring joy into your life?"
Step 3: People & social settings that provide distraction
In our current training, support network is tapped in a way that requires Contacts to actively engage with the support network in relation to the presenting issue. But from Stanley-Brown safety planning standpoint, that is actually NOT required in this step. For example, a person may ask to hang out with a friend just to be around other people and never bring up suicidality, even if that was something that they are struggling with. Again, suicide risk is temporary: even people who are suffering from chronic suicidality are not usually imminent risk 24/7. The goal of safety planning is how to get through that moment through a variety of ways:

Most importantly, the part to note about this step of the safety plan is “social settings”. A lot of times our Counselors currently try to find anyone under the sun that can maybe tangentially support the Contact. However, asking for help is a high hurdle for anyone, and having to re-explain your situation and your triggers over and over again can be traumatic on its own. Social setting is as simple as “going to a local coffee shop” or “going to church”. There is no expectation in either of those examples for someone to start having deeply intimate conversations about death and dying. But sometimes it’s just about not being alone when you feel that way.
Appropriate Examples
●	“You mentioned earlier part of what’s been triggering the thoughts of wanting to die is being alone. Is there any place you can go to that will help alleviate that feeling of isolation for you?”
●	“You told me you really enjoy spending time with your dog, Bobbie. How do you feel about spending some time with Bobbie today?”
Inappropriate Examples
●	Jumping straight into asking about supportive people in their lives without the necessary exploration of the other areas of safety planning.
●	Starting with the Contact needing to self-disclose and divulge their crisis as a condition of being around someone.
