Contact Resistance to Safety Planning
Safety Plans are a collaborative effort and should involve the full participation and willingness of the Contact to engage with the plan. Not all Contacts will express an interest in working on a Safety Plan, in which case alternative strategies should be explored to address the safety of these Contacts while keeping their comfort and stated boundaries in mind. In these instances, it may be helpful to:

1.	Ask some additional questions to understand what it is about Safety Planning that is difficult or uncomfortable for the Contact to think about. Make sure to validate the feelings brought up in this conversation.
a.	“It can sometimes be tough to think about ways to stay safe. What feelings come up for you when I ask about your safety?”
b.	“Is there something you would like for me to know about what safety or feeling safe means to you?”
2.	Check in around ambivalent and ambiguous answers regarding safety (i.e., “it doesn’t matter”). Gather additional information and explore why this is (un)important for the Contact. If a Contact has trouble identifying coping strategies, external supports, etc., it may be helpful to gently explore possible strategies or supports.
a.	“I’m hearing that thinking about ways to stay safe doesn’t seem really important to you right now. Tell me more about why that feels unimportant?”
b.	“Is there something that you feel is more important for us to talk about right now?”
c.	“It sounds like it’s hard to think about what you can do to stay safe. I want you to know that I care about you and your safety, and I’m glad you reached out today. If you’re open to it, maybe we can work together to think of some things people can do to feel safe or connect to support, and see if there’s anything that you’d be interested in trying out with me or on your own after our conversation?”
3.	Refer to the current conversation and their reaching out as a step they have already taken to  address their safety and affirm that reaching out to Trevor can be part of a plan going forward.
a.	“In spite of everything going on right now, your reaching out and talking with me is a step you have taken to address your safety. That is not always easy, and I think it says a lot that you were willing to reach out to us today. We are always here for you when you need someone to talk to.”
b.	“While it sounds like safety is difficult to think about, I want to thank you for reaching out today. That is a huge step to take in addressing your safety. As you have been managing these thoughts for a while, I wonder if there are some other things you’ve done in the past to get through these difficult moments, and anything we might be able to try out today?”
4.	Ask more questions of the Contact to get a better sense of why they reached out, and what they hoped to gain from the conversation.
a.	“While our focus is on helping folks remain safe during a crisis, I hear that safety is not a topic you are interested in talking about right now.  Maybe you can tell me more about why you reached out tonight, so that I can better support you during this conversation?” 
5.	Temporarily move back into the Contact’s presenting issue(s), and/or to the Gathering Information section of the support model. Some Contacts may need more time before they feel comfortable exploring a Safety Plan. Be sure to circle back to Safety Planning, and check in to see if their Risk Level has changed during the conversation. 
a.	“It sounds like thinking of ways to stay safe feels like too much right now. I’d love to hear more about what’s been going on for you. What thoughts were going through your head as you reached out to us today?” 

Ultimately, some Contacts may not be willing or able to collaborate to address their safety. While Counselors should try to ensure that their safety is addressed, and that the conversation is in line with The Trevor Project’s protocols regarding de-escalation and bringing conversations to a close, Counselors should never force a Contact to engage in Safety Planning. If a Contact expresses little or no interest in addressing their safety, and they are at Imminent Risk, please reach out to a Supervisor for support, as they will coordinate with the OCC to determine if an Active Intervention is necessary.
Safety Planning Examples by Stanley-Brown Step
While safety planning always relies on the same general principles and guidelines and uses the same Stanley-Brown Safety Plan Template, each individual safety plan will look different and should be tailored to each individual Contact’s needs, abilities, accessible resources, and situation. Here are some examples of how to approach each step of a Stanley-Brown Safety Plan:
Step 1: Warning signs
It’s helpful, not just for the Counselors, but for the Contact to be able to explicitly identify what are things that lead to the current state of suicidality they are at. Being able to reflect the contributing events and thoughts that lead to the point of seriously considering, or even attempting, suicide is the first part of Stanley-Brown safety planning. This can help Contacts be aware of enacting the safety plan the next time they may find themselves in a similar situation/feelings.