Appropriate Examples
Many of our Gathering Information questions that talk through precipitating events and triggers are all helpful questions to ask about warning signs:

●	“What brought on these thoughts you’re having today?”
●	“So, tell me what happened. What lead up to the [suicide attempt]?”
●	“You mentioned earlier that [your breakup, etc.] caused your thoughts of suicide. Was there anything else going on?

Notice that neither of the above examples uses the phrase “warning signs”. It is a technical term and will not make any sense if that’s what the Counselor asked directly without actually leading up to that in the conversation, such as weaving the term in prior to the question.
Inappropriate Examples
Unhelpful ways to get at warning signs are ways that are framed as for our own benefit. While we need to understand enough to respond in a personalized manner, the person we are supporting to process and understand their own situation is the Contact first and foremost.
●	“I want to understand why you want to die.”

In addition, it is not helpful to approach any part of safety assessment nor planning in the framing of an obligation or a required step to follow. Not only can that come across as insincere, it undermines the point behind the assessment and the safety planning: the fact we care about the Contact, their well-being, and their needs in that particular moment.
●	“I have to ask about your warning signs because it says to do so on this checklist.”
●	“As a suicide and crisis line, I’m required to make a safety plan with you. What are the warning signs?”
Step 2: Internal Coping Strategies
The reason Stanley and Brown characterize coping strategies as “internal” is because all other active parts of safety planning are external to the person. That does not mean that all coping strategies must be internal behaviors and thoughts. All coping strategies that can be done “without reaching out to other people” are considered internal. Therefore, kickboxing is still an internal coping strategy, even though in the broader scientific literature kickboxing would be an externalizing behavior.
Appropriate Examples
●	“What have you done in the past to distract yourself when you feel [x]?”
●	“When you [watch TV], what about it that you find to be helpful?”
●	“If we wanted to write down a distraction you can try today, what would you write down?”
Inappropriate Examples
Framing distractions with positive emotions is a really high bar since it’s entirely common to feel like nothing makes them feel even a tiny bit better, especially for folks navigating chronic suicidality. The goal of coping skills is not symptom improvement, but a distraction to get through the moment. Even something completely basic like eating, sleeping, and/or drinking water can all be distractions.
●	“What makes you feel better when you are feeling like you want to kill yourself?”
●	“What are things that bring joy into your life?"
Step 3: People & social settings that provide distraction
In our current training, support network is tapped in a way that requires Contacts to actively engage with the support network in relation to the presenting issue. But from Stanley-Brown safety planning standpoint, that is actually NOT required in this step. For example, a person may ask to hang out with a friend just to be around other people and never bring up suicidality, even if that was something that they are struggling with. Again, suicide risk is temporary: even people who are suffering from chronic suicidality are not usually imminent risk 24/7. The goal of safety planning is how to get through that moment through a variety of ways:

Most importantly, the part to note about this step of the safety plan is “social settings”. A lot of times our Counselors currently try to find anyone under the sun that can maybe tangentially support the Contact. However, asking for help is a high hurdle for anyone, and having to re-explain your situation and your triggers over and over again can be traumatic on its own. Social setting is as simple as “going to a local coffee shop” or “going to church”. There is no expectation in either of those examples for someone to start having deeply intimate conversations about death and dying. But sometimes it’s just about not being alone when you feel that way.
Appropriate Examples
●	“You mentioned earlier part of what’s been triggering the thoughts of wanting to die is being alone. Is there any place you can go to that will help alleviate that feeling of isolation for you?”
●	“You told me you really enjoy spending time with your dog, Bobbie. How do you feel about spending some time with Bobbie today?”
Inappropriate Examples
●	Jumping straight into asking about supportive people in their lives without the necessary exploration of the other areas of safety planning.
●	Starting with the Contact needing to self-disclose and divulge their crisis as a condition of being around someone.